ABOUT
^^^^^
Exceltex is a LaTeX package combined with a helper program written in
Perl. Exceltex makes it easy to include tabulars and cells from
Excel(TM) files in LaTeX documents.

Exceltex honours simple text formatting like bold, italic and font
colors.  

Exceltex' intention is it to provide a "do it once and forget"
solution for accessing data from spreadsheet files. You don't need to
sync data in LaTeX with the Spreadsheet anymore (or even copy each
cell by hand - uhhhh), except that you have to press the "save" button
of your spreadsheet application before running exceltex :)




REQIREMENTS
^^^^^^^^^^^
The exceltex helper script uses the Spreadsheet::ParseExcel Module to
actually read the Excel files.
For formatting stuff the LaTeX Packages ulem and color are used.

Exceltex is beeing developed and tested on Linux. Due to filename/path
issues it will not run "out of the box" on Windows or any other
non-Unix like Operating System.

Why using excel files for this? The Excel file format is easily
accessible via the Spreadsheet::ParseExcel module in Perl, and all
serious Spreadsheet applications are talking the Excel file format.  I
really would like to support the file format of a native Linux
Spreadsheet like Gnumeric, wich is actually the application i use, but
it seems that only the Excel fileformat saves the results of
calculations. And this is simply a prerequisite to access the data
from files.




LATEX COMMANDS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Exceltex provides two commands to include single cells and cell-ranges
for tabulars. Load the exceltex LaTeX package via
\usepackage{exceltex}.

   \inccell{foo.xls!results!B9}
   	includes cell B9 from sheet results in file foo.xls

   \inctab{foo.xls!results!B2!C15}
    	includes  the  14  rows between B2 and F15 from sheet results
	in file foo.xls in LaTeX' tabular format ('&' separated rows
        ended by \\)

For both commands you may omit specifying the file (foo.xls) if it has
the same basename (foo) as the LaTeX file (foo.tex).




USAGE
^^^^^
Mark cells and tabulars for inclusion with the \incell and \inctab
commands. Then run latex, exceltex and latex again.




EXAMPLES
^^^^^^^^
The following Example demonstrates the usage of exceltex:

--- snip ---
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[options]{exceltex}

\begin{document}

\title{a brief introduction to exceltex}
\maketitle

\section{including single cells}

You can include contents of cells with the \\inccell command. Example:
Cell A1 on sheet 'Sheet1' of file foo.xls is:
\inccell{foo.xls!Sheet1!A1}


\section{including tabulars}

this is as easy as including single cells.

\begin{tabular}{lll}
  \hline
  column 1 & colum 2 & colum 3 \\
  \hline
  \inctab{foo.xls!Sheet1!A1!C5}
  \hline
\end{tabular}

\end{document}
--- snap ---

now, run latex, then exceltex and latex again.

The \inctab command does nothing else than provide the requested cells
in LaTeX' tabular format - colums are separated with a '&', each line
is endet with a line break (\\). This gives you a maximum of
flexibility and the freedom to use whatever tabular package you want.

You can force to disable formatting and coloring of cells with the -F
resp. -C commandline switches.

Currently one package option is supported.
\usepackage[cellrefs]{exceltex} will write cell data to files named by
filename, workbook and cell instead of sequentially numbered
files.



PROBLEMS
^^^^^^^^

* Exceltex cannot read Excel files created by Spreadsheet::WriteExcel
  (see Spreadsheet::ParseExcel documentatin for details).

* Workbook names must not include problematic characters (LaTeX
  control Characters) (^,_,#). Just use Letters, Numbers and a Minus
  as spearator.  

* when using the cellrefs package option, whitespaces are also
  forbidden in workbook names and filenames. These are LaTeX
  limitations, i think.





HOW IT WORKS
^^^^^^^^^^^^
The first LaTeX run writes an entry for each \inctab, \inccell command
to a spearate index file (\jobname.exltx). This index is then read by
the exceltex helper script, which actually extracts the ordered data
and writes it to sequentially numbered files in the directory
\jobname-exltx.  The \inctab and \inccell are then simply including
these files via a \InputIfExists{} command on the following latex runs.




TODO
^^^^
Support for other formats than excels would be appreciating. There is
maybe a chance to get OpenOffice Calc working. There is now a module
OpenOffice::Parse::SXC on cpan which could to the job for Openoffice,
but it seems quite new and is not includeded in Ubuntu yet.  On the
other hand, support for different fileformats would yield a naming
problem, at the time i started with exceltex (in 2004) there was only
Spreadsheet::ParseExcel, so the name exceltex ....




CONTACT
^^^^^^^
WWW:   http://www.physik.uni-freiburg.de/~doerr/exceltex
EMail: Hans-Peter Doerr <doerr@cip.physik.uni-freiburg.de>




COPYING
^^^^^^^
exceltex is Copyright 2004-2006 by Hans-Peter Doerr
<doerr@cip.physik.uni-freiburg.de>

This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There
is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

exceltex is distributed under the terms of the Gnu General Public
License (GPL).  See COPYING for details.


